layout: post
title: "Html5 Forms"
category: HTML
tags: [html, tutorial, form]
--- 

## Tutorial

- [HTML5 Forms: JavaScript and the Constraint Validation API](http://www.sitepoint.com/html5-forms-javascript-constraint-validation-api)
- [The Difference Between Anchors, Inputs and Buttons](http://davidwalsh.name/html5-buttons?)

## Validation

- [Building HTML5 Form Validation Bubble Replacements -Telerik Developer Network](http://developer.telerik.com/featured/building-html5-form-validation-bubble-replacements)

## FAQ

### The Difference Between Input Tags and Buttons

HTML forms have several different ways to submit, as you've learned on the previous page. Two of those methods are the `INPUT` tag and the `BUTTON` tag. There are good reasons to use both of these elements. 

__The `INPUT` Element:__

The `<input type="submit">` tag is the easiest way to submit a form. It requires nothing beyond the tag itself, not even a `value`. When a customer clicks on the button, it submits automatically. You don't need to add any scripts, the browsers know to submit the form when a submit `INPUT` tag is clicked. 

The problem is that this button is very ugly and plain. You can't add images to it. You can style it just like any other element, but it can still feel like an ugly button. 

Use the `INPUT` method when your form has to be accesible even in browsers that have JavaScript turned off. 

__The `BUTTON` Element:__

The `BUTTON` element offers more options for submiting forms. You can put anything inside a `BUTTON` element and turn it into a submit button. Most commonly people use images and text. But you could create a `DIV` and make that entire thing a submit button if you wanted to. 

The biggest drawback to the `BUTTON` element is that it doesn't automatically submit the form. This means there needs to be some type of script to activate it. And so it is less accessible than the `INPUT` method. Any user who doesn't have JavaScript turned on won't be able to submit a form with only a `BUTTON` element to submit it. 

Use the `BUTTON` method on forms that are not as critical. Also, this is a great way to add additional submission options within one form.

See:

- [The Difference Between Input Tags and Buttons](http://webdesign.about.com/cs/forms/a/aaformsubmit_2.htm)
- [html - `<button>` vs. `<input type="button" />`. Which to use? - Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/469059/button-vs-input-type-button-which-to-use)
